---
layout: page
title: Example 1 - Caverns and Crabs
permalink: /e1
---

This is a very simple text adventure game for you to play and perhaps be inspired by.

<pre class="language-rust line-numbers"><code>use std::io::{stdin, stdout, Write};

fn main() {
    println!("Welcome to Caverns and Crabs, brave adventurer!");

    let mut flashlight_on: bool = false;
    let mut crab_seen: bool = false;
    let mut crab_health: u8 = 3;
    let mut exit_seen: bool = false;

    loop {
        print!("> ");
        stdout().flush().unwrap();
        let mut input = String::new();
        stdin().read_line(&mut input).unwrap();
        input.pop();

        match input.as_str() {
            "look" => {
                if flashlight_on {
                    if crab_health > 0 {
                        println!("You scan the cavern with your cone of light. As you turn around, you are faced by a huge crustacean just a few metres ahead. It menacingly clacks its claws in your direction. There is a magical wrench in your pocket that's good for squashing bugs and dealing with evil crabs.");
                        crab_seen = true;
                    } else {
                        println!("The cave is completely empty. There seems to be pathway leading further up.");
                        exit_seen = true;
                    }
                } else {
                    if crab_seen {
                        println!("You should turn on your flashlight.");
                    } else {
                        println!("You appear to be in a dark cave. The rocky walls are not visible, but you can feel them as you stumble around. You remember that you prepared for a situation like this and probably have flashlight in your bag.");
                    }
                }
            },
            "use flashlight" => {
                if flashlight_on {
                    println!("You turn off the flashlight.");
                    flashlight_on = false;
                } else {
                    println!("You fumble for the flashlight and activate it with a click.");
                    flashlight_on = true;
                }
            },
            "use wrench" => {
                if flashlight_on && crab_seen {
                    if crab_health > 1 {
                        crab_health = crab_health - 1;
                        println!("You dodge the crab's claws and hit it with your wrench. It clacks its claws at you menacingly.");
                    } else if crab_health == 1 {
                        crab_health = 0;
                        println!("With one final swing of your wrench, you manage to hit the crab right between its eyes. With a pop, it vanishes from existence.");
                    } else {
                        println!("You can't see anything to use it on.");
                    }
                } else {
                    println!("You can't see anything to use it on.");
                }
            },
            "go up" | "go pathway" => {
                if flashlight_on && exit_seen {
                    println!("You go through the tunnel. It leads you all the way back to the surface. Relieved, you make your way back to your home. Thanks to you, the world of Rustacia is once again free of bugs.");
                    println!("Thank you for playing Caverns and Crabs! See you next time!");
                    break;
                } else {
                    println!("There is nowhere to go.");
                }
            },
            "exit" | "quit" | "q" => {
                println!("Thank you for playing Caverns and Crabs! See you next time!");
                break;
            },
            "help" => {
                println!("Caverns and Crabs Usage Guide:");
                println!("\"look\" -> Look around");
                println!("\"use\"  -> Use an item or object");
                println!("\"go\"   -> Go somewhere");
                println!("\"exit\" -> Quit the game");
                println!("\"help\" -> Print this usage guide");
            },
            _ => println!("I do not know what you mean by \"{}\". Type \"help\" for a list of commands", input)
        }
    }
}
</code></pre>
