---
layout: page
title: Lecture 1 - On Bits and Bytes
permalink: /l1
---

### Prologue

By now, it should be obvious to everyone that the information revolution has and will continue to dominate or at least influence significant aspects of our life, probably for the entirety of humanities future. To express this in a less abstract fashion: Computers are everywhere, whether you like it or not.

Computers appear and, indeed, often are needlessly complicated. The most important aspect of understanding how computers work is gaining the skills needed to communicate with them.

In this course we will be learning how to communicate with computers using the programming language Rust. The language is generally considered to have a steep learning curve for newcomers. However, this assumes that the newcomer is already a programmer with plenty of experience in other languages. As an example, German appears to be a difficult language to master from the perspective of an English speaker, but nonetheless it is being successfully taught to German children. Following this analogy, I believe Rust should be as easy to learn as any other language for complete beginners.

In the same way that cultural immersion is necessary for the mastery of a human language, it is helpful to immersive yourself in the language, community and projects surrounding Rust.

This is what Rust looks like:

```rust
fn main() {
  println!("How do I look?");
}
```

However, this course will start with a more abstract discussion of computer systems in general. Let's begin then already, shall we?

### The Computer as a Machine

### The Computer as an Information Processor

Given this physical structure, computers can't interact with information in the same way that humans do.

### The Computer as a Tool for Humans

Built upon these basic commands we can give computers are abstractions that we name programming languages. These hide the fundamental language of computers beneath a more sophisticated language which is easier for humans to understand. However, as we have now taken a step back from the commands that a computer system understands, we will now need a translator. Nowadays these translators run on computers themselves and generally come in one of two forms: Compilers and interpreters.

Rust, the language which will be used in this course, is a compiled language. The abstract code we write is translated by a compiler (rustc) into machine code, which a computer can read and execute directly.

### Post Scriptum: Setting up the Environment for this Course

There are only two things that you will initially need for this course: The Rust compiler / build system and a text editor. You will most likely already have a text editor installed on your system (Notepad on Windows, TextEdit on macOS and I assume you already know if you're using a Linux distro). While these will work for our purpose, I would recommend installing an editor that is designed for programming, such as Atom, Visual Studio Code or, if you are feeling adventurous, vim.

The Rust compiler (rustc) and build system (cargo) are very easy to install. Installations can be done on all popular platforms using [rustup](https://rustup.rs/). Below is the sample output for running the installer on a macOS system.

<pre class="language-bash command-line" data-user="ferris" data-host="pc" data-output="2-43"><code>
curl --proto '=https' --tlsv1.2 -sSf https://sh.rustup.rs | sh
info: downloading installer

Welcome to Rust!

This will download and install the official compiler for the Rust
programming language, and its package manager, Cargo.

It will add the cargo, rustc, rustup and other commands to
Cargo's bin directory, located at:

  /Users/ferris/.cargo/bin

This can be modified with the CARGO_HOME environment variable.

Rustup metadata and toolchains will be installed into the Rustup
home directory, located at:

  /Users/ferris/.rustup

This can be modified with the RUSTUP_HOME environment variable.

This path will then be added to your PATH environment variable by
modifying the profile files located at:

  /Users/ferris/.profile
  /Users/ferris/.zprofile

You can uninstall at any time with rustup self uninstall and
these changes will be reverted.

Current installation options:


   default host triple: x86_64-apple-darwin
     default toolchain: stable
               profile: default
  modify PATH variable: yes

1) Proceed with installation (default)
2) Customize installation
3) Cancel installation
></code></pre>

Simply proceed with the installation using the given default values (Just press enter).

### Exercises

1. Convert the integer 2020 to a binary representation.
2. Convert the hexadecimal value 0x539 to a decimal representation.
3. Create and run an empty project using cargo. (_Hint: [Cargo Documentation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/getting-started/first-steps.html)_)
